Good afternoon everyone.
Welcome to session 205,
Audio Hardware and MIDI.
Please welcome Core Audio MIDI Plumber,
Doug Wyatt.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
This session is in three parts.
In the first part,
I'll be going over a few things
about the core MIDI framework.
In the second part,
Jeff Moore will cover what's new in
Tiger for the core audio framework.
And the last portion of the session,
Nick Thompson will be covering some
audio hardware and driver issues.
So for the core
MIDI portion of this talk,
I'll be covering very briefly
some basics of core MIDI.
There's some best practices
issues I'd like to cover.
And there's a new API for
Tiger called the Core Audio Clock.
So most of you who are working with
MIDI already know what it's about,
but for those of you who don't,
a good resource is the MIDI Manufacturers
Association at mma.org on the net.
And there's some good
books out there about MIDI.
Our APIs are documented in the headers,
and there's some documentation and
examples in the developer directory.
We've got a very active mailing list,
and there's, this is probably about the
fifth WWDC that I've been
talking about core MIDI at,
and there's DVDs of the
previous year's sessions.
So in the area of best practices
with the existing core MIDI APIs,
there's just two things
I want to talk about.
One falls in the area of user experience,
and the other is performance
issue with timing accuracy.
So the first thing that I've seen
in some applications is difficulty
in giving the user a good experience
with seeing the names of his devices.
And here we've got a moderate-sized
studio with a bunch of devices,
as seen in the
AudioMIDI setup application.
And there's devices connected to
about five of the eight ports there.
And what I've seen is
that in some applications,
they'll just show me the name
of the MIDI port where the user
would really like to see the
name of the external device.
I realized after I made this slide,
this is sort of a confusing
example because there's actually
two different devices on port 3.
So for output, I'd want to see repeater.
For input, I would want to see radium,
the names of the external devices.
So I just want to quickly show
you a little application that
illustrates a couple of approaches
displaying MIDI endpoints
in your application.
So here you might want to,
in the case of multiple
devices on one port,
and actually this setup that I have
here doesn't have any examples of it,
but here we see the names of the ports
where there aren't external devices,
and then we see the names of the
external devices where there are some.
These menus don't have the names
of the external ports in them.
This may be a little draconian.
It forces your users to go
through audio MIDI setup.
Some applications do that.
It's okay.
And this also illustrates that you can
go through and obtain pairs of ports.
So here we're only seeing the devices
which I have a two-way connection to.
Notice here that I have
the radium as a source,
the repeater as a destination,
but it doesn't appear here.
Wow, that's probably a bug.
So the idea is to only show
here the devices to which
there is a two-way connection.
So, back to the slides, please.
So what this quick and
dirty program does,
it's using some sample code from our SDK,
but just to go over the process,
you can iterate through the sources
and destinations in the system with
MIDI get source and get destination.
Once you've found a source
or destination endpoint,
you can find out what's connected to it
with the property connection unique ID.
Then you can go find that
object that is connected with
MIDI object find by unique ID,
and then you can ask that for its name.
But it's probably best if you
use the C++ class in our SDK,
CA MIDI endpoints.
And if there's bugs in it,
like in my demo,
I don't know if that's in
my demo or in the SDK code,
but in any case,
that's a really good place to start.
It'll show you the sequence of calls.
There's a few strange cases to deal with.
And it'll give your users the
names that they expect to see.
So the other best practices issue
I'd like to cover is MIDI timestamps.
I've noticed that there are some
applications that send all their
outgoing MIDI with a timestamp of now,
which means that by definition,
it's going to be late by the
time it gets to the hardware.
Not very late, necessarily.
But there's some good
reasons not to do that,
because
Well, one I've got mentioned here on
the slide is that there is an
Internet Engineering Task Force proposal
in the works for doing MIDI over IP.
And with networking MIDI,
the timestamps are going to become really
important because we're going to see
more jitter and latency than we would
just on a normal local MIDI network.
The other is that we're starting
to see applications or contacts
where people want to use multiple
applications on the same computer
and synchronize them together.
And you can send a MIDI timecode or
MIDI beat clock very efficiently between
applications using the IAC driver,
which was introduced in Panther.
And if those events are timestamped,
then the applications can achieve really
good synchronization between them.
If they're not,
then application A may not
be able to synchronize.
It may be sending its timestamp,
you know, sending with no timestamp now.
And there's going to be a little
bit of propagation until the
time it gets to application B,
maybe only a couple hundred
microseconds or something.
But that's not going to
provide totally accurate sync.
So there's no reason not to be using
timestamps when you schedule and paying
attention to timestamps when you record.
There are a few applications that
might want to do MIDI throughing
in real time and say,
"Well, I just need to send everything
as soon as I get it,
and that's okay." I would just suggest
that you measure your performance,
and if you see that you're
getting more jitter than you like,
you can add a little bit of latency.
Say, "Okay,
play this two milliseconds from
when it came in," for example,
and that should smooth out most
of the jitter that you'll see.
One major area of new features
in Tiger for us is this API set
called Core Audio Clock.
It's actually in the
audio toolbox framework,
but it touches on core
MIDI in a lot of ways.
So it's being discussed in this session.
So if your app has any kinds
of synchronization needs,
especially involving
MIDI timecode and MIDI beat clock,
whether it's coming from an
external source or you want to
sync to another application,
this API will provide a lot
of the grungy code for dealing
with those MIDI timing formats.
It also does some other time conversions,
interpolations between various formats,
as we'll see in a minute.
And if your application is
already used in the music player
APIs in the audio toolbox,
this hasn't happened yet,
but those will be put on top of -- well,
there will be a clock object
embedded in the music player.
So if you're using the music player,
then you'll get the ability to send
and receive MIDI timecode for free.
Modulo,
whatever user interface you're using.
face you need to put on top of it.
And so, yeah, what the clock does,
it manages synchronizing your
application between audio and
MIDI timecode or MIDI clock.
It's an extensible internal architecture,
and at some point we may add
other synchronization sources.
And it's got math for, you know,
but it does all the grungy math of
dealing between SMPTE time formats,
synchronizing as an audio device's
time base and samples via the HAL.
It deals with seconds along your
application's media timeline,
and if your application has a
concept of musical beat time,
it'll convert between seconds and
beats and those other formats.
So this just illustrates kind of what's
going on under the hood in the clock.
In the top blue line,
we have your application's
media timeline,
so zero being the beginning of time,
for example.
And in the green boxes,
we have the hardware reference timeline.
And so what the clock is doing is
maintaining a series of correlation
points between those two timelines.
There's this idea of a start time.
If your application is
starting itself internally,
then the user might have said
start 40 seconds into the piece.
And so you set the start time,
and that's where playback begins.
If you are in external sync mode,
the start time is the timestamp,
for example, of the first MIDI time code
message that was received.
So it's the point at which sync was
achieved and time begins moving.
And then as time continues to move,
the clock object continues to
take new anchor points referencing
media and hardware times,
and then performs all subsequent
time correlations and conversions
using those anchor points.
So here we see diagrammatically
how the different time
formats relate to each other.
On the left in green,
we have the hardware time references,
the host time base as used by the-- well,
that everything's based on in the
Core Audio APIs and Core MIDI.
There's the audio devices sample time.
The HAL does the correlation
between the host and audio times.
On the right, we have different ways of
expressing time along the timeline,
the blue boxes.
So seconds is the main way
of describing these times.
It's a floating point number.
And from seconds we can convert
to beats if you supply a tempo map
and we can apply a SMPTE offset
to get to a SMPTE time in seconds.
Excuse me.
In the gray boxes on the right,
this just illustrates that there are
some auxiliary APIs in the clock for
converting between beats and a display
textual representation of beats.
And similarly with SMPTE seconds away.
Since SMPTE seconds
can be floating point,
we're actually seeing an example here of
a SMPTE time that's going out to 80 bits
per frame or however many bits you want,
actually.
And the circle in the middle indicates
how the clock is correlating between
the hardware and timeline times using
variable play rate that you can set.
You can say, for example,
play twice as fast.
Okay, so with those concepts,
I'd like to just give you a
quick look at an application
that uses the Core Audio Clock.
OK, so this document shows pretty much
everything that's in a clock object,
except what's below this line
here is an audio file player,
and I'll show you that in a minute.
And so if I click go,
then time starts moving.
I've got a SMPTE time over here on the
left and a bar beat time on the right.
If I change the tempo,
you can see suddenly we're at
a different bar beat time and
it's moving twice as quickly.
And I can create a second clock object.
And I'll have this one send
MIDI timecode to the IAC bus.
I'll have this one receive
MIDI timecode from the IAC bus.
And I'll play them, and they're in sync.
Let's have a little more fun here and
we'll have this one play an audio file.
So I can very speed this clock,
and this one's following along.
And so I got all that running
and I thought that's pretty cool.
So what happens if I have two of these
guys playing audio files together?
So now these are both
playing the same file.
They're synced together
with MIDI timecode getting
sent over the IEC bus.
And how close together do
these clocks really stay?
Let's turn down the volume here.
And I'll go to my favorite
portion of this song.
That's a little confusing because
there is a very phased sound there.
I don't know if you can hear the hi-hat.
It's over to the left.
In any case, according to my math here,
these two players
Despite being yanked
around with various speeds,
are within one or two
frames of each other.
So that's the Core Audio Clock.
Okay,
so next Jeff Moore is going to talk about
new features in the Core Audio Hell.
So today I'm going to talk, as Doug said,
about a couple of new features
in the Core Audio HAL.
The first new feature that you'll
see is there are new I/O data
formats supported by the HAL,
including variable bitrate I/O,
and also non-audio data like
sideband data such as timecode
and control data and other things
that aren't actual audio samples.
And the other new feature I'm going
to talk a little bit about today
is the aggregate device support.
So currently,
when you're doing I/O with the HAL,
in your I/O proc,
you're always going to be
moving the same number of bytes.
Either you're going to be getting
x number of bytes of input,
or you're going to be providing
y number of bytes of output.
And further,
the mixability of the streams is
always controlled at the device level,
meaning that if you want to
switch to a non-mixable format,
you have to tell the device,
and all the streams are
switched to that way.
And currently we support linear
PCM data and IEC 6958 compliant streams,
and that's SPDIF for
the alphabet impaired.
That includes data formats like AC3,
MPEG-1, MPEG-2,
and other things that can be
smashed into a format that can be
sent over that digital interface.
So now in Tiger,
we're adding the ability to move
a varying number of bytes through
your IOPROC when it's called.
This is important for formats such
as RAW AC3 where the number of bytes
per packet varies for each packet.
And you're going to be told that
through the audio buffer list,
the mdata byte size field.
And you'll need to make sure
you're always paying attention
to that field and aren't just
assuming that it's constant anymore.
And on output,
you have to make sure that you tell
the HAL how much data you're supplying.
And you can see in this
code example a very simple
IOPROC that is doing exactly that.
It is iterating through all
the output audio buffers in
the provided audio buffer list.
And it is stuffing some VBR data
into it and then telling the HAL how
much data it's stuffing in there
by assigning back to the mdata byte
size field of the audio buffer.
So now with the new IO data formats,
this basically is around
other non-mixable formats.
And with these,
you have to be able to have
a mixable data stream side by
side with a non-mixable stream.
Consequently,
you're going to have to be dealing
with mixability now at the stream
level as opposed to the device level.
And you can find out about
the mixability in two ways,
either by the mixability property,
or you can use the format information
that's provided by the HAL.
In particular,
the audio format flag is non-mixable
will be set in the M format flags
field for non-mixable formats now.
Variable bitrate and coded formats
are also now going to be supported
for input as well as output.
Previously,
they were just supported for output only.
And this is going to be including,
as I said,
raw AC3 data as well as raw MPEG 1 and
2 and any other data that you have.
And this can also be used to
transport non-audio sideband data.
For example, time code,
such as SMPTE coming into the
hardware or word clock time or
other forms of synchronization.
And it's also good for real-time
controller information for
devices that support that.
So before I talk a little bit
more about aggregate devices,
I want to talk a little bit
about the problem that aggregate
devices are there to solve.
Basically,
when you're syncing multiple devices,
you have two problems to deal with.
You have the different
interpretation each device has for
what the sample rate really is.
That's also known as
the clock drift problem.
And then you have each device has its
own amount of presentation latency in it.
And you have to solve both of these
problems if you want to do I.O.
synchronized on multiple devices.
So to solve these problems,
you can use hardware
clock synchronization,
and that's where you are running
an actual physical cable between
all the devices and sharing a
clock signal among all the devices.
And this can be done using
digital audio interfaces like
AES or SPDIF or ADAT interfaces.
And you can also use
things like House Sync,
Blackburst, and other more high-end
video-oriented Studio Sync situations.
Hardware Sync provides the best solution
for the clock drift problem since it's
actually synchronizing the hardware
at the DAC level so that you know the
samples are going to be within some
very small amount of time of each other.
But hardware clock synchronization
doesn't solve the latency problem at all.
So in addition to hardware,
you can also do the
resynchronization in software.
Now, doing it in software is an order of
magnitude more complicated than it
is in hardware because your software
needs to be able to judge how fast each
device is running with respect to each
other and then compensate accordingly.
And you use various kinds of
resampling techniques to do that.
But you still need to compensate
for the latency differences even
when you're doing software sync.
So aggregate devices are the
HAL's attempt to solve all these
problems in a way that makes
it useful for your application.
It gathers together any number
of disparate audio devices
on the system into a single
cohesive unit for audio I.O.
And it will perform synchronized I.O.
to all those sub-devices regardless
of what their sync situation is.
They can be hardware synchronized,
they can be software synchronized,
and the HAL will still be
able to deal with that.
And to do this, of course,
it solves the problems I was just
talking about of the different
amounts of presentation latency,
and it does the clock drift compensation.
So the user can create aggregate
devices that are global to the
entire system in audio MIDI setup.
And I'll show you in a few
minutes about how that works.
Applications can also create aggregate
devices that are either global to the
system or local just to that process.
And that's done programmatically
through API calls in the HAL.
And then the HAL will also, on its own,
create a global aggregate device
for each I/O audio device that has
multiple I/O audio engines in it.
For example, USB audio devices that have
both input and output will now
appear as a single unified whole.
So you can only aggregate devices that
are implemented by I/O audio drivers.
So some of you may have heard me talk
about the need to write an I/O audio
driver rather than a user land driver.
This is one of the benefits
you get by doing that.
You get to play for free in
the aggregate device world.
So further,
all sub-devices in an aggregate device
have to be of the same sample rate.
And of course, the sub-devices can't be
hogged by another process.
And all their streams have to be mixable.
So when you're looking at an
aggregate device and its sub-devices,
the ordering of the sub-devices that
you set up either programmatically
or through the AMS UI is important.
And it determines the ordering
of the streams in the aggregate
device that you see in your IOPROC.
So for instance, if you have two devices,
device A and device B, and in that order,
devices A streams will come
before devices B when you
look at them in your IOPROC.
and further, aggregate devices will
retain knowledge about the
sub-devices that they aggregate,
even if the devices aren't
present or have been deactivated
because of some format conflict.
And further,
missing devices or devices that are in
the wrong format will automatically just
come back into being in the aggregate
device when their situation is updated.
Each aggregate device
has a master sub-device.
The master sub-device defines the overall
timeline for the entire aggregate device.
This means that all the timestamps
you see from the HAL when you call
audio device translate time or in
your IOPROC are going to be defined
in the timeline of the master device.
Further,
all the timing numbers that go with
the aggregate device are the ones
reported for the master device.
For instance,
the latency and safety offset figures
are that of the master device.
The final job the master device serves
is to provide the frame of reference
that the HAL uses to judge clock drift
in the other sub-devices in the device.
Now, when you're picking
the master sub-device,
obviously if you have a
hardware sync situation,
you already have in hardware
a notion of a master clock,
and the device that corresponds
to that clock should also be the
master device in the aggregate.
Now, barring that,
you should always just look
and set the device's clock.
You can also look at the device
that has the most stable clock.
Now, you can kind of guess at that by
what transport type the device uses.
PCI and FireWire devices, for instance,
tend to have much more stable
clocks than USB devices.
So now to deal with the differing amounts
of latency in the various sub devices,
the HAL has to go through and look at
all the sub devices and figure out what
the maximum amount of latency there
is going to be for each sub device.
And once it finds out which sub
device has the most latency,
it then will pad out the
latency of the other devices by
padding the safety offset of the
devices so that they all match.
And here you can see a little
diagram showing three audio devices.
Now, device C has the most combination
of latency and safety offset.
And you can see how device A and
device B are getting padded out
so that they all come out equal.
Now, this is really important to do
this padding because that's what
ensures that all the devices start
in synchronization with each other.
Without that,
you'll be all skewed all over the place
and you'll never be able to achieve sync.
So once you've dealt with the latency,
you also have to deal
with the clock drift.
Now, aggregate devices in the HAL will
work regardless of what the clock
domain situation is for each device.
So whether it's hardware
synchronized or whether it needs
to be synchronized in software,
the HAL's game for doing it.
Now, for each sub-device you
have in an aggregate,
you can set independently what kind
of clock drift compensation to use.
Now, there are going to be three
basic versions of it in Tiger.
First, there's no compensation,
and that's the method you're going to
use for hardware sync situations because,
well, you don't have to do anything.
It's already in sync.
And then there's going to be a very
low CPU overhead sample dropping
doubling algorithm who's going to
be there to account for that one
sample of drift over five hours
of time that you're going to see.
And that's going to be little CPU,
very little CPU.
But with a potential... If it has to
run often to make the synchronization
happen of getting some audio artifacts.
And then the HAL will also use
the same high-quality resampling
algorithms that are in the audio
converter to do the full bandwidth,
you know, quality really matters
style of resynchronization.
And just so you guys know,
the software synchronization is
not in the seed you have today.
That will be coming, we hope,
sometime in the future.
So now you know what agro-devices do do.
Now there are a few
things that they don't do.
They don't provide controls.
They don't do volume, mute,
data source selection,
and all the other sort of little doodads
that you get on a regular audio device.
And the reason for this is simple,
is that aggregate devices
are there to be an I.O.
abstraction.
They're not meant to be
kind of the system console,
if you will.
You should always go back to the original
device to do the manipulations of volume,
stream format,
and other things like that.
Now,
aggregate devices also can't be hogged.
That kind of plays into the fact that
they can't be non-mixable either.
And finally,
an aggregate device cannot be hogged.
So if you're going to
use aggregate devices,
you have to provide the means for your
users to select them for your engine.
They cannot be set as the default.
Mostly that's to shield applications
that don't want to have the impact,
the performance impact of running
on an aggregate device from
just inadvertently seeing that.
So now I'm going to show you a little
bit about how aggregate devices work.
So in Tiger, in AMS,
there's a brand new dialog
that allows you to configure
the various aggregate devices.
Now, I'm here on a 15-inch PowerBook,
and I've also brought with me a
bunch of other kinds of devices just
to show you kind of how it works.
The first device I have here is a,
let's show you this one first.
It's a Edderall UA3 USB interface.
It has input and output.
It's stereo.
Now, the reason this one's interesting
is this will show you what
happens when the HAL creates
an automatic aggregate device,
since this device has one IO audio
device that has two IO audio engines.
and the rest of the team.
So, you can see an AMS by looking at
the icon what kind of device it is.
You can see the UA3,
the normal UA3 is here and you can
see all its controls and stuff.
And now we go to the aggregate UA3.
Now, an AMS kind of shields you from some
of the implementation details but,
you know,
those of you that have been fighting with
this for a while know that this is really
when you look at the UA3 in AMS you're
looking at two independent audio devices.
And so you have to run two separate
I/O procs in order to do I/O with that,
to just do pass-through I/O,
for instance.
Now, with the aggregate UA3 USB device,
you can now run one I/O proc and do
pass-through and in-place processing
and all the things you would have had
to do more complex management before.
Now,
I've also brought an Echo Indigo PC card.
Just kind of showing you the interface.
Okay.
So, I've got a few things here.
I've got a few things here.
I've got a few kind of show you
something a little more exotic.
It's a little stereo two-channel device,
and it pops up, and it's all good.
So now I'm going to make an
aggregate device out of it.
So you open the aggregate device editor,
and you start out with no aggregate
devices that are user-made.
The automatically generated aggregate
devices don't appear in this
dialogue because there's nothing
you can really configure about them.
So you click on the plus
button to make a new one.
You can give it an interesting name.
Whoops.
And then you go in and you can see
down below all the devices that you
have that you can add to the aggregate.
Now I'm just going to
click on all of them.
And then once you have them clicked,
you can move them around.
Because the order is important,
so you can drag them around.
And then you can use the clock
radio button to select which is
going to be the master device.
And that's pretty much it.
And you can see now that we've
created this aggregate device,
it now shows up in the pop-up for-- well,
it did show-- this is it.
The name isn't updated.
That's a bug, too.
So, but there you can see it.
You can see now this
aggregate device has,
you know, four input channels and
four output channels and,
you know, and it's, when you do I.O.
with that, you're going to see,
you're going to be
doing synchronized I.O.
across all the devices
that were in the aggregate.
And that's pretty much
all there is to it.
Next up, I'm going to be bringing
up Nick Thompson,
and he's going to talk about
driver development in OS X.
and other devices.
So I want to talk about developing
audio hardware devices for Mac OS X.
I wanted to look at the kinds of
devices you might do for built-in
hardware with a standard Macintosh,
and I want to look at how you can expand
on the built-in capabilities that you
find in every Macintosh computer by
using high-speed serial interfaces.
You'll have noticed that music and audio
have become very important to Apple.
And what we're talking about in this
part of the session is how to get
audio in and out of your computer.
So the key thing here when we're thinking
about this is when you develop a product,
you want to hit as
many people as you can.
So USB and FireWire, if you're developing
an expansion product,
are in every Macintosh
computer that we ship today.
There's also good opportunities for
using the built-in analog connections,
both for input and output
for audio peripherals.
When you look in Darwin at
the driver stack,
you'll see a bunch of things.
The two things you really want
to look at are Apple Onboard
Audio and Apple USB Audio.
Apple USB Audio gives you kind of a basic
template for how to write a USB driver.
The Onboard Audio is a little more
complex because there's a whole
bunch of stuff that we have to do.
So when you're looking
at the source code,
you'll actually see a
whole bunch of plug-ins.
So I recommend if you want
a template audio driver,
USB,
or the examples in the Core Audio SDK for
the Phantom Audio driver
are the place to start.
So the technologies
available are basically,
you can use the stuff that's built in,
and that's usually analog,
but we also supply digital output
on Power Mac and Touch G5s,
but basically you're
limited to two channels.
If you want to go multi-channel,
you're going to need some
kind of audio peripheral.
And if you look at the list of
things that you can do here,
PC cards, PCI, I mean,
they're good solutions,
but you're only going to
hit a subset of the market.
And if you're going to
develop for the platform,
it's a good idea to hit the
most people that you can.
So we really recommend USB and FireWire
for the development of audio peripherals.
So we kind of think about audio
devices in this kind of continuum,
for want of a better word,
of audio devices.
And at the consumer level,
we kind of see built-in audio.
It's cheap to do an analog peripheral.
You can do some really
attractive things with that.
USB is a good approach for hobbyists.
You're a little limited in the
number of channels that you get,
but it's a good connect solution.
And we look at FireWire as
being a kind of prosumer,
pro solution.
So let's kind of dive in and take a
look at what's available for built-in.
Basically, you've got two kinds of things
that you'd be looking at here,
input devices, output devices,
or little mixers.
They'd be analog connect.
The codecs that we ship in Macintosh
computers have great noise specs,
and they actually measure better
than a lot of USB devices out there.
So this is a good way of
actually connecting peripherals
if you only need stereo.
The other thing that's important
to think about is optical SPDIF,
which is available on
the Power Macintosh G5.
You can develop peripherals
that can do things like AC3 if
you want to do multi-channel
data by encoding the stream.
You can also use this for getting
audio in and out of your computer
digitally at a very low cost.
So consider SPDIF if you're looking at
development of this type of peripheral.
So kind of summing up for built-in,
it's basically stereo,
and there's also optical support.
So there's some good opportunities
there for peripheral development.
Moving on kind of to USB.
The important thing to emphasize
here is if you develop a device that
conforms to the USB Implementers
Forum specifications for audio devices,
it's just going to work
with Apple's driver.
This is really important because you want
to minimize your development costs when
you're bringing a new device to market.
So always consider trying to
make a class-compliant device
if that's possible for you.
We put the audio class driver in Darwin.
It's open source.
But what we've seen in the past
is that developers will take a
drop of the Darwin source code,
start working with it.
We go fix a bunch of bugs,
improve the parser, add new features,
and they're kind of stuck on
this two-year-old source base.
So if you can develop a
class-compliant device,
it's going to work with our driver.
If it doesn't work with our driver,
please let us know,
and we'll fix our driver.
The other thing I wanted to call out
here is the Audio Device 2.0 spec.
The current spec is, I believe,
the Audio Device 1.0 spec,
and that's several years old now.
There's a device working
group working on a 2.0 spec,
and we're tracking this work.
We're studying it.
If you're developing a USB 2.0 device,
please talk to us because we
really want to make sure it
works with our driver set.
The Class Drive is full-featured.
One of the things that we want to
call out is there's actually a small
API in there for doing DSP plugins,
and that may seem kind of weird
because you've probably heard
a lot about core audio plugins.
This is kind of a different thing.
This is if you're, for example,
making some speakers and you have
a proprietary base enhancement
algorithm for your loudspeakers,
and you don't want everybody
to get access to that code.
You can use the plugin API to
basically match to your device and
only your device so that your code
will only run with your device,
and that's an important thing.
So summing up on USB,
basically we see USB as a very good
solution for consumer applications
and low-cost applications.
But the thing that's problematic about
USB is that customization of your device
may actually require a custom driver.
It's a lot of work.
The other thing is that the bandwidth for
USB 1.1 devices is relatively limited.
You're looking at basically eight
channels of input or output.
But it's a good solution
for a limited channel count,
and you can also do MIDI support.
The thing I really wanted to
dive into today is FireWire.
We're really excited about FireWire.
If you're developing a
FireWire audio device,
you essentially have multiple options.
You can develop a custom device,
and a lot of developers have been
very successful with a custom device.
The problem with developing custom
devices is you've got to figure out the
protocol for getting data to the device.
You've got to write
firmware for the device,
and you've got to write a
device driver for the device.
Now, the people who've done this
have come first to market,
and they've got great products.
But it is something to think
about when you're considering
how to implement your device.
A better way to go is to develop
your device according to some
of the TA specs out there.
And there's really two specs that
you want to look at-- the audio
subunit and the music subunit.
They kind of overlap,
and it may actually be necessary
in a music subunit device to
have an audio subunit so that you
can get at some of the controls,
such as volume controls.
The other thing we stress is if
you're developing a FireWire device,
join the 1394 Trade Association.
They're the umbrella organization for
people developing FireWire devices.
They look after some of the specs.
And there's a lot of
good information there,
particularly in terms of getting
access to draft specifications.
However, we recognize that there are
some challenges in developing
a FireWire audio device,
and we kind of looked at why it was
difficult to do this and why there
weren't more FireWire devices out there.
Really, it falls into three main areas
in terms of the problems.
There's a lot of standards.
If you go to the 1394 TA standards page,
you can spend 10 or 15 minutes trying to
figure out how everything fits together,
and then you can spend several
weeks actually downloading and
reading all of those specs.
Also, compared to USB,
the cost of silicon has been
perceived as really high.
We're going to talk about that,
and I'm actually going to bring up
a couple of vendors that we've been
working with who've been looking
at much lower-cost solutions.
And then the other difficulty
is the software development.
You've got two kind of areas here,
the problems in terms of developing the
firmware for the device and also the
problems for developing device drivers.
So let's try and clear some of this up.
In terms of a roadmap for standards
relating to audio devices,
this slide shows the kind of things
that you're going to be interested in.
Really, 1394 defines the base electrical
spec and packet format on the bus,
and the 61883 specs
kind of cover streaming.
In a sense,
when you're dealing with your device,
the stuff that you're going to
be sending and receiving from
the device falls into two areas,
isochronous transfers and
asynchronous transfers.
Isochronous transfers
for guaranteed bandwidth,
and for every 1394 packet,
a certain amount of that packet on the
bus is reserved for isochronous data.
Asynchronous is data that you kind
of want to get to the device and
you want to have it acknowledged,
but it doesn't necessarily
have to go right now.
It turns out you use ISOC for
streaming MIDI and audio,
and it turns out that generally
you use async for querying the
capabilities of the device.
So this slide-- can
you actually read this?
This slide kind of covers the
specs that you really care about.
At the top, audio and music subunit,
you kind of need to decide which
is most appropriate to your device.
Generally, audio subunit devices
are simpler devices.
They're appropriate for speakers.
They're appropriate
for simple I/O devices.
Music subunits are usually devices
where you have a number of audio streams
and you also want to embed MIDI data.
So when you're considering
developing a FireWire audio solution,
there's essentially
three main components.
We've talked about the hardware,
the software, the hardware, the firmware,
and the device driver.
Firmware is basically what's going
to run on your embedded system.
The device driver is what's
going to run on the Mac to
communicate with your device.
The key point here is if you develop
firmware that's spec compliant,
you don't have to do device driver work.
And that's a really big issue in terms of
the cost of development of your product.
So let's look at some of the
resources available for developing
audio devices based on FireWire.
There's a number of silicon vendors
out there who have products.
They range from relatively
expensive to relatively inexpensive.
We recommend that you do some research
and have a look at a couple of vendors
when you're choosing a solution.
BridgeCo were pretty much the
first out of the gate shipping
standards-compliant silicon.
And they have a solution
called the DM1000,
which is in a number of the devices that
were announced earlier this year at NAMM.
The interesting thing about BridgeCo is
they have licensable firmware which
can be customized for your application.
and we've been working with
a number of vendors who are
bringing their products to market
based on the Bridgecut solution.
The first one out of the
gate was the Roland FA-101.
It's a cool illustration of it up here.
A 10 in, 10 out device with MIDI support.
A number of other vendors have
announced support of this platform.
And this platform is basically
music subunit compliant.
To talk about an audio
subunit compliant device,
I'd like to bring up
James Lewis from Otsu Semiconductor
to talk about their product.
Thanks Nick.
We're here today to introduce some
technology for bringing a very
low-cost solution to FireWire audio
for multi-channel applications.
You can also see this on
our booth downstairs and at
Plugfest later on in the week.
Now Oxford Semiconductor has a very
strong background in FireWire technology
through our mass storage chips,
so most of you have probably heard of us.
And we're a very strong
adherer to the 1394 standard,
and also through our position
on the 1394 Trade Association,
we're actively involved in developing
new aspects of 1394 standards.
So we're going to give you a bit
of a technology introduction into
the chip and a demo to finish up.
And I'm going to hand over
to Andy Parker to do that.
Thanks, James.
OK, so we're all developers.
Oh, could we go back to the slides,
please?
Maybe not.
Could we have the slides, please?
Thank you.
So we're all developers.
What we're really interested
in is what's in the box.
And the first thing we turn to
in the spec is the block diagram.
The real thing to take home from
this picture is that most of what
you get on the 970 is actually
contained within the device.
And if you want to implement
an audio subunit which you can
connect onto the FireWire or 1394,
as we call it, bus,
you only need really a
handful of components.
And in this case,
we're talking about an external
physical interface for the
1394 and also at the back end,
an I2S audio interface.
In terms of the data flow
from the bus to the output,
we basically have a very short
path from the link layer going
through a queue selector,
which basically filters out
isochronous and asynchronous data
that Nick talked about earlier,
through a FIFO,
which is just a small buffer,
and then out onto the audio core.
We have an interesting application
example which is basically looking
at multi-channel audio decode.
And in this particular case we have
a compressed stream arriving over
FireWire and is being transferred
by the 970 and through a hardware
decoder and then passed out to a
multi-channel audio D2A converter stage.
And this would be sort of
typically applied for replaying
surround sound on your system.
It's an interesting application
because it exploits one of the more
interesting features of the 970,
which is that it's quite flexible in
terms of the content that you pass it.
The firmware actually transfers the data
from the iSoconer side to the I2S port.
So whatever that data is,
provided it's compliant with standards,
you can then transfer the data
over and match the two formats.
We provide a developer kit which,
as Nick has talked about before,
implements an AVC audio subunit.
And it uses the standard
AVC command set to control and
monitor the audio properties,
so things like mute settings,
volume control.
And it also decodes the
incoming isochronous data,
which is, again,
compliant to AM824 specifications.
It implements clock recovery,
which is basically just matching
the rate of data that comes in
to the rate of data going out.
Because if you don't do that,
you'll get strange distortions.
And it works with the existing
Mac OS X FireWire audio driver.
For the firmware development,
we use standard
open-source GCC toolchain.
And you can even develop
that on the Mac itself.
We support most... popular
host development systems.
We can also provide with the
framework to basically customize
the firmware to match your specific
codec which is set on the back end.
There's a full reference
design schematics and
evaluation board available.
In terms of the firmware itself,
the whole thing,
the important thing to note is
the whole thing only comes to less
than 64 kilobytes in terms of the
operating size of the program.
And we've crammed quite a lot in there.
So we have...
Mac OS X, ooh, in 64K.
I think that may be a mistake.
We have an operating system layer,
which is not Mac OS X.
And that just basically provides
a sort of low-level startup
code for the processor that
we have embedded within the 970.
And then we have a standard 1394,
or FireWire for the rest of its API,
and some queue selector configuration.
And again, all the queue selector does is
it's just filtering out isochronous
and asynchronous traffic.
And then we have some
higher-level handlers,
which are handling the
standards-compliant data and generating
the right responses to keep the Mac side
happy and compliant with the AVC specs.
and I think we now have
time for a quick demo.
Could we roll the demo, please?
So this is generating the
surround sound over FireWire,
being decoded on the 970
and played through the PA.
Yes, all these FireWire guys do
is stand around and play
Unreal Tournament all day.
That's the Oxford board, the EVM board.
We'll talk about this in a second,
but we'll have both of the solutions that
we're going to talk about today available
for you to take a look at in the lab.
We'll talk about that at
the end of the session.
So one of the difficulties we
talked about with USB devices
is customizing your device.
One of the really cool things about
FireWire is it makes customizing
device behavior way simpler.
And the way that you can do that is
to send AVC commands to the device.
So I'm going to talk you
through a quick example.
It's not particularly realistic because,
hey, we're sending a volume command,
and usually you'd rely on Core Audio to
send the volume command via the
Apple FireWire Audio device driver.
But it's a good example of how you
can customize behavior of your device.
So there's actually a user client
in the FireWire audio driver that
allows you access to various services.
And you'll see in this example that these
services are preceded by the FWA prefix.
So you can go count
the devices on the bus,
open one of them, check its vendor ID,
and get its device name.
Now, this obviously isn't a particularly
realistic example of how you
would match to your device,
so I would suggest that you go
look at the FireWire SDK for
much more comprehensive
examples of device matching.
But it kind of illustrates the point.
The really cool thing about doing device
customization in this way is you don't
have to write a kernel device driver.
And your customization
code resides in user space,
so you don't have to deal with
kernel panics if you screw up.
And it's going to help you to do that.
debug your code.
To send the command to the device,
you set up a command block,
and this example shows how to set
it up for an AVC volume command.
And then to send your command,
you simply call the execute AVC command,
making sure that you check that your
device actually accepted the command.
An example of using the FireWire
audio client is actually
the MLan implementation and
MLan support in Mac OS X.
The Apple driver creates and
manipulates 61883-6 streams,
but Yamaha supply an application
which does device discovery
and configures the network.
While we're on the subject of MLan,
some of the enhancements
coming to future system update,
multiple device support,
so you're going to be able to use
things like an ONX with Motif EX,
and also external sync so the devices
can sync to an external clock.
One of the things that I really
want to talk about today is
the reference implementation
of AVC music and audio devices.
Apple have been working on this,
and we're going to release it
later in the year as part of
the FireWire reference platform.
We're going to provide an audio subunit
reference and a music subunit reference.
The way that this is all going
to fit together is you have all
this stuff that runs on the Mac.
On the device,
you're going to run some firmware.
This is based on a
real-time operating system,
RTOS.
And on top of that,
we're layering the Apple FireWire
Reference Platform.
And the Apple Reference Music subunit
will sit on top of that.
The other thing that's necessary when
you're developing a device is the
ability to update the device's firmware.
There's really two sides to this.
The firmware on the device needs to be
able to accept an incoming ROM image,
and you also need an application
that can send the firmware
image down to the device.
Most people who have FireWire
devices expect the device to
be updatable over FireWire.
The other resource when you're
developing your device are tools
from the Apple FireWire SDK.
Matt, our FireWire developer, said,
don't develop a device without it.
There's some really cool
tools on the FireWire SDK.
Firebug is a packet sniffer.
An AVC browser will allow
you to look at the device
descriptor for your AVC device.
So I'd like to bring up Yoaram Solomon,
who's the general manager of the
consumer electronics connectivity
business unit at Texas Instruments,
to talk about some exciting things
that we've been working with TI on.
Thanks, Yoaram.
That's only half of my title.
If we used the entire title,
I would run out of five minutes I have.
Nick, thank you for having
me here in California.
Anybody else flew from Texas here today?
Yeah, we just left a whole month
minus five days worth of rain
and tornadoes and everything.
Believe me, you're not missing anything.
Anyway,
I'm going to spend the next 20 minutes,
got you, three minutes,
talking about what is
it that we're offering.
We've been working with
Apple for the past,
I guess, several months,
more than just several months,
developing this platform that
you can take off the shelf
and we make it available right
now and work with the SDK.
It has been quite an experience.
It's kind of fun taking the devices
that we typically put in just those
standard boring type end products and
finally put them on a kind of fun device.
Some of the... Am I going
backwards or... Yeah,
I'm going backwards.
I'll stay on my title again.
Okay, I already told you about
the cooperation with Apple.
Texas Instruments has been focused,
the 1394 development to some extent,
in audio products where they have
a lot of sensitivity to timing
and all kinds of specifications.
You know, one thing,
three things I can promise
you in this presentation.
I'm not going to get too technical,
that's one.
Two is I don't have a demo,
and the third thing is we don't
have Mac OS in 64K either.
Our USB devices,
we have USB devices especially
for audio applications.
You can see them whether it's audio DACs,
ADCs, controllers, codecs.
Therefore, as Nick said,
kind of the mid-range, lower-end,
cost-sensitive type solutions.
FireWire is really where we shine.
Nick focused on that, we focused on that.
We have a device that you're going to
see in the next slide called IC-Links,
or as we like calling it, TSB43CB43A.
And that's not including the package.
That's really a relatively high-quality
device that you should see.
It's reasonably priced.
The board that Nick talked about
is a board that's going to be
demonstrated in the lab tomorrow.
The device that I'm
going to emphasize now,
this is the IC-Links.
Right top corner is where it's really at.
This device is one-stop shop for
everything $13.94 to a relatively
high-quality audio platform.
That's all I have.
Thank you.
So we're absolutely delighted
to be working with TI on this.
And it basically gives you a
low-cost development platform
for adding high-speed serial
into an existing device.
We see this applicable to
things like synthesizers,
digital musical instruments,
digital effects units,
kind of MI products.
The key thing here is by basing
your audio device on Apple's
Music Subunit Reference firmware,
you're going to really reduce
your cost because there's quite
a lot of effort in actually just
doing the FireWire firmware.
So by adopting this solution,
you're going to be able to very easily
work on the parts of your product
that differentiates in the marketplace
rather than doing infrastructure work.
And we think this is very important.
The other thing is you'll be able
to work with our device driver,
and this is going to save you
development time on the driver side.
So summarizing, FireWire Audio,
it's a big pipe.
There's more bandwidth than USB.
There's a number of other advantages.
We'll list some of them here.
So FireWire is a good solution
where you need a lot of
bandwidth and a lot of channels.
You've got MIDI support in there,
and it's extensible by using
AVC vendor-specific commands.
So if you're considering producing
a new device or adding high-speed
serial to an existing device,
we really encourage you to look
at developing with FireWire.
We've got resources available
from multiple vendors that are
far lower cost than the products
that are currently shipping,
and we're going to save you
money in terms of development
time on your driver set.
That kind of covers our
continuum of audio devices.
So just to summarize,
there's a ton of opportunities out there.
You can look at low-cost
garage band peripherals.
You can look at very high-end
FireWire solutions for the music
and audio production environment
and everything in between.
Analog solutions are great for built-in
audio on Mac and such computers.
And for hobbyist and prosumer solutions,
we recommend that you
look at high-speed serial.
The key thing here is I really urge you,
when you're considering
developing a new device,
look at standards-based devices.
You know,
you'll be saving yourself driver work,
and your customers will be way happier.
So in terms of who to
contact about stuff,
I definitely recommend if you're a
hardware developer that you build
a relationship with Craig Keithley.
He's an IO Technologies evangelist.
His email address is here.
There's also a great mailing
list with a lot of traffic on it
and a lot of very cool people,
both inside Apple and outside of Apple,
answering questions on
the Corotia mailing list.
And there's mailing lists available
for FireWire and USB developers.
We also have a fairly
considerable reference library.
There's a good bulk of information
about Core Audio and developing
device drivers on Apple's website.
Generally, a good jumping-off point is
developer.apple.com slash audio,
and there's a reference to
most of these resources there.
There's a Core Audio SDK,
which you should definitely be
looking at from developing at
an application point of view,
and there's sample drivers
in the Core Audio SDK.
And the audio web page is there.
If you're developing a FireWire device,
you should also look at Apple's
FireWire reference platform,
because that can save you a lot of time
and effort in firmware development.
The other thing is,
the thing at the bottom is the
important thing on this slide.
There's a couple of trade groups,
USB Implementers Forum, 3940A.
Check those out if you're developing
either a USB or a FireWire device.
And then finally, tomorrow at noon,
the audio driver team will be available
in the Graphics and Media Lab.
We'll be showing the TI board.
We'll, I think,
have Oxford represented there,
so you can look at their board.
Hopefully,
we'll be able to answer any questions
that you have about developing firmware
or device drivers for audio devices.
So thanks a lot.